---
layout: post
title: "Z"
date: 2014-01-05T13:19:55-08:00
comments: false
categories: [ cli tools]
---

I spend fair amount of time on the command line, and one of the most useful tools I've come
across is a little script called '[Z](https://github.com/rupa/z)'. Here's what it does in a nutshell:

1. Intercepts call to `cd` and keeps track of where you're `cd`'ing to, when, and how often.
2. Provides a `z` command that accepts a flexible regex syntax and will `cd` to the best directory
   based on Z's "frecency" algorithm:

>Frecency is a portmanteau of 'recent' and 'frequency'. It is a weighted
>rank  that depends on how often and how recently something occurred. As
>far as I know, Mozilla came up with the term.

>To z, a directory that has low ranking but has been  accessed  recently
>will  quickly  have  higher rank than a directory accessed frequently a
>long time ago.

>Frecency is determined at runtime.

It works _great_. It guesses correctly the vast majority of the time. Certain directories
become hot for a while depending on what a person is working on, and Z effectively uses that pattern
to jump to the correct location. What I like best about the operation is that when the target is something
like: `/Volumes/HD/dev/personal/web/foo/bar/blah/stuff/yay/whatever`, I can usually type `z what` and
get to where I need to go.

The other aspect that I really like is the simplicity. Installation is a one line addition your .bashrc/.zshrc
file, and using it is nothing more than using `cd` like you normally do for a while until it figures our where
you want to go.

[Use it](https://github.com/rupa/z).
